# AdaChess - Smart Chess Engine

AdaChess is an open source chess engine written entirely in the Ada programming language. So far, AdaChess played the IGT 2014, IGT 2015, IGT 2016, IGT 2017, IGT 2018 and IGT 2019 G-6 tournaments, and the PT 54 CSVN tournament, all over the board.
The playing strength of AdaChess is around 2100 Elo. See the updated ELO at the [CCRL rating](http://ccrl.chessdom.com/ccrl/4040/) and [CCRL Blitz](http://ccrl.chessdom.com/ccrl/404/).

For further information about the engine, please refer to the [Chess Programming Wiki](https://www.chessprogramming.org/AdaChess) page of the engine 

The source code should be very readable and it is well commented. You need anyway a basic knowledge on chess programming to understand how components works together.
AdaChess is a true original chess engine written with fun and cool ideas in mind.

## Engine features

AdaChess is an intermediate/advanced engine that comes with many features, many of them unique. Here a list of the most important:
- Board representation as array of 120 squares
- Pieces-list to track piece position
- Legal move generator
- Complete set of time control (the clock is handled in a separate thread)
- Statistical data for perft and divide (see https://www.chessprogramming.org/Perft_Results, most of those data have been generated by AdaChess) 
- Complete evaluation function that takes into account:
  - Pawn structure: penalties/bonused for doubled, isolated, exposed, backwards, passed, unstoppable passers, candidate, supported, outposts, and so on
  - King safety (based on attack on the king zone, pawn shield and opponent pawn storm, open columns around the king)
  - Mobiliy (consider also x-ray mobility of bishop and rook through queens)
  - Other factors like material balance, trapped rooks/bishops, bishop pairs, rooks on (semi)open files and on 7th/2nd square and so on
- Search based on AlphaBeta with Itearative deeping and Quiescence
  - Transposition Tables
  - Late Move Reduction
  - Advanced SEE, takes into account also checks and moves on dangerous squares (empty squares attacked by opponent pieces)
  - Null Move observation with verification for zugzwang
  - Extensions/reductions mainly based on tactical moves and history data
- Advanced Opening book handling:
  - Use any PGN as opening book as well as multiple PGNs (specify from command line)
  - Support for simple opening books with one game per line (old style) 
- Support for the following notation: Standard Algebraic (fully disambiguated), Long Algebraic, ICCF and Winboard/UCI notation
  - Note: the divide command output with the desired notation
- Support Winboard/Xboard communication protocol
- Read/Write FEN positions

Although you can play AdaChess from console, it is strongly reccomend to use an external UI that support Winboard/Xboard protocol and setup the engine. The two UI are Winboard and Arena.

# Performance

On my laptop (Intel i5, 4Gb of ram):
- perft 6 from the starting position in 5.5 seconds (around 21M position per seconds),
- searches for around 500K NPS
- reaches an average of 10-11 depth search in a middle game in around 5 second

# Planned features

- Add UCI support
- Support for pawn hash tables
- Automatic tuning of evaluation parameters
- Further selectivity algorithms in search
- Any other ideas that is cool to have or to implement

# Compile and Run AdaChess

The fastest way to compile AdaChess is to download an Ada compiler and open the gpr file (adachess.gpr). Be sure that the scenario mode is on "release" and compile it. The executable will be on the same directory.

To use a PGN file as opening book, place the PGN in the same directory of the engine and run it with the --opening-book command line option, for example:
- adachess.exe --opening-book Kasparov.pgn
if you wish to use more opening books on the same time just add more command line options:
- adachess.exe --opening-book Kasparov.pgn --opening-book Carlsen.pgn --opening-book default.pgn

Note that parsing the PGN files will take some time and huge books can take minutes to be loaded.

## Using AdaChess with Arena or Winboard

To use AdaChess with an external UI please refer to the pdf documentation inside the DOC folder 

# License

AdaChess is a GPL licenced software, if comes with source code and binaries for Windows (executable) in order to be used without compilation. The binaries are availabe at the official engine internet site https://www.adachess.com. Download, play and enjoy!


<!--
**adachess/AdaChess** is a ✨ _special_ ✨ repository because its `README.md` (this file) appears on your GitHub profile.

Here are some ideas to get you started:

- 🔭 I’m currently working on ...
- 🌱 I’m currently learning ...
- 👯 I’m looking to collaborate on ...
- 🤔 I’m looking for help with ...
- 💬 Ask me about ...
- 📫 How to reach me: ...
- 😄 Pronouns: ...
- ⚡ Fun fact: ...
-->
